# Submitting K10-blanketten

K10 (Kvalificerade andelar i fåmansföretag) is something I need to submit every year. It is not for my AB, but
for me as a private person since I own that AB.

## Allmänna uppgifter

- Choose "huvudregel"
- Antal ägda andelar – 500
- Antal andelar förvärvade - 0

## Huvudregeln

- Omkostnadsbelopp vid årets ingång
  - This is 25000 \* 10,94%. Pre-2010, you needed 100k to start an AB, but it was lowered to 50k. 2020 onwards, it was lowered even further to 25k.
- Lönebaserat utrymme section – fill in my salary in all 3 required fields (because I'm the only employee)
  - This section lets you verify if you qualify for huvudregeln

Done!

### General observations

Most, if not all, of the information you need to fill in feels like information that Skatteverket already has.

I understand that they need to create a general solution that fits everyone, and it'd be too
costly to improve the UX. But I would have liked a user journey that was more like this: similar
to filling time reports, instead of needing to specify which dates you worked, you just need to
specify sick days/vacation days. In other words, have a journey where you only specify
deviations from the previous year. Ownership and omkostnadsbelopp are unlikely to change,
but "Lönebaserat utrymme" might see smaller changes for each year (due to brytpunkt for statlig skatt).

K10-blanketten is another example of something that involves data from a long time span –
I'm submitting it in 2024, based on dividend I received in 2023. The way the dividend is
taxed (utdelningsutrymme) is based on my salary in 2022.

Skatteverket has a poorly designed login system in the sense that you'd easily mistaken it
for a phishing site. While they operate on skatteverket.se, the login is on weird domains like
https://m03-mg-local.auth.funktionstjanster.se/mg-local/auth/ccp5/grp/this.

### Creating an importable K10-blankett

The process is messy, but it's described in the links found on https://skatteverket.se/privat/etjansterochblanketter/blanketterbroschyrer/broschyrer/info/269

After trying it out, I believe it's more maintainable and practical to programmatically generate a list of manual steps.

The actual website form does not match the PDF form of which #UPPGIFT and <FältKod> are based on.
There are a ton of <FältKod> to keep track of, and even if I did import a file, I'd still go through the
website UI to verify that everything is correct. Additionally, sparat utdelningsutrymme
and a particular interest rate are two things you'd have to keep track of.
